David Schaich (he): Okay, that should be
David Schaich (he): me all set up, just waiting for
David Schaich (he): Zoom to confirm
David Schaich (he): that it is recording.
David Schaich (he): We are in the final tutorial of the term, on the eleventh of May, for which the
David Schaich (he): 6-digit code for
David Schaich (he): today is 5, 1,
David Schaich (he): 8, 1, 7, 5.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): one quick logistical note, while I
David Schaich (he): try to get this projector to
David Schaich (he): make sure it's easily legible to all of you, is that marking for that last homework assignment remains under way. It'll be done over the weekend.
David Schaich (he): Final makeup lecture on Monday or
David Schaich (he): overall issues or questions can be discussed in more detail. But in the meantime the solutions are up on canvas
David Schaich (he): for you to check out without that level of delay.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): I have a plan for today, but before I get that under way under a questions or requests about topics to cover this last
David Schaich (he): tutorial.
David Schaich (he): maybe it will help if I briefly.
David Schaich (he): it feels
David Schaich (he): that you are hoping for we'll be introducing any additional.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): this past week was looking at last structures.
David Schaich (he): There were 2 parts to that. First. The conceptual questions related to. If we're health state
David Schaich (he): of the using model on various different lattices.
what
David Schaich (he): So we'll start off with that. And there you.
David Schaich (he): rather than going into that fully connected lattice, which is a bit more of a piece of the calculation. we can spend it. I suspect all the remaining time looking at some prep for
David Schaich (he): the exam. That's coming up 2 weeks from tomorrow that fully connected lattice You'll just be up also up on canvas.
David Schaich (he): the modules for you, too. check out.
David Schaich (he): You have the time and inclination.
David Schaich (he): So some
David Schaich (he): calculations to exactly solve it.
David Schaich (he): That system.
David Schaich (he): In the meantime, though
one thing I forgot to mention
David Schaich (he): last week, when introducing these funny lattice structures. that motivation for us is given by their applications to
David Schaich (he): science and technology. In this case, the
David Schaich (he): also super conductivity which it's popped up previously in this module.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): what links to electrons being able to flow in materials without any electrical resistance or not, using the energy to heat which.
David Schaich (he): and that they increase the energy efficiency. All sorts of you like products
David Schaich (he): with the copy out there, typically in order to be comes to well within one kelvin of absolute 0.
David Schaich (he): There's been a lot of work over
David Schaich (he): the past few decades searching for
David Schaich (he): special that
David Schaich (he): conducted a a high critical temperature.
David Schaich (he): and this is an illustration of one of the medals
at the atomic structure
David Schaich (he): of one of those mills it has been discovered with it's called super called activity. In this case
David Schaich (he): us sitting on at about 50 Kg.
David Schaich (he): Which is much easier to reach the still not.
David Schaich (he): and not every day temperature.
David Schaich (he): And what this
David Schaich (he): physics for lies on is precisely the underlying that structure
David Schaich (he): which we can recognize as being based on one of those it's a generalization
David Schaich (he): of the
David Schaich (he): came up as the 3 dimensional version of the introduced last week.
David Schaich (he): We have alternating a lot of structures. Yes. combined with
David Schaich (he): it's called something from
David Schaich (he): a nitrogen. It's one example of those. and then we alternating last, some structure oxygen.
David Schaich (he): Before I I commit with what's called
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): first extended row of the periodic table, the heavier elephant, so some the exactly atoms in there. But what's more of work is the
David Schaich (he): that allows for about the virtual behavior with
David Schaich (he): some crucial technological applications.
David Schaich (he): Oh, yeah.
David Schaich (he): picture showing. I can zoom that can hopefully get a bit better resolution on the page
David Schaich (he): and check you down for
David Schaich (he): questions for requests now that the it is good outland.
David Schaich (he): Just briefly review
David Schaich (he): conceptual questions raised last week about the you ground states of using models on
David Schaich (he): these 3 2 dimensional labs structures, the square lattice.
David Schaich (he): which is also what we do.
David Schaich (he): Yes, in the lectures.
David Schaich (he): the honeycomb lattice.
David Schaich (he): and the
David Schaich (he): I Chemistry secret conductor. interesting behavior. so
David Schaich (he): simplifying to turn off that extra. so that you. using all energy.
David Schaich (he): generalize
David Schaich (he): J. Capital, J. And the sum over it's been an interaction between the nearest neighbor
David Schaich (he): pairs that are set by the links to the lattice under consideration.
David Schaich (he): and we consider. first, the case J. Equals 0.
David Schaich (he): I know the same one
David Schaich (he): in the
David Schaich (he): it would be for any one of those
David Schaich (he): life structures in this case.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): yeah, the total energy
David Schaich (he): it's going to be
David Schaich (he): for that the
David Schaich (he): cubic class.
David Schaich (he): And in terms of the State itself. This corresponds to
David Schaich (he): all these things
David Schaich (he): in the same direction. and because they can all be there online. pointing out the value of plus one for S, where they can all be aligned pointing down. There are 2
David Schaich (he): each other of micro states
David Schaich (he): with that perhaps the
David Schaich (he): don't need to generate. All this is the line either pointing out or pointing down.
David Schaich (he): and yes, one of the other conceptual questions that introduce
David Schaich (he): what you should think about over the week is.
David Schaich (he): can these grasses be distinguished from the disordered micro states that
David Schaich (he): dominate that high temperatures with the energy becomes effectively irrelevant compared to this habit share.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): I guess here it's also an easy answer to this.
David Schaich (he): J. Greater than 0 includes and J. Equals one case, which is what we have been looking at in the lectures.
David Schaich (he): and all this things are one.
David Schaich (he): There's an overall order
David Schaich (he): to one
David Schaich (he): how the values of the students are distributed home all the last. All the same.
David Schaich (he): it is for you.
David Schaich (he): Think about those
David Schaich (he): spins as corresponding to molecular negative dipole, which was the physical system that
David Schaich (he): motivated the construction of this using model for
David Schaich (he): roughly a 100 years ago. This is
David Schaich (he): where the property of feral magnetism provides. It is all of the small mole that's aligned in the same direction to create an overall
David Schaich (he): macroscopic magnetization for that material
David Schaich (he): getting back to the lectures for the special case, J. Equals one, and the special case
David Schaich (he): of the
David Schaich (he): we saw that the
David Schaich (he): or a parameter that distinguishes this order phase from the high temperature disorder phase
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): the derivative of the free energy. With respect to the external magnetic field H. And for each of these ground states magnetization. it is either plus one or minus one. So it actually takes that
David Schaich (he): maximum of what?
David Schaich (he): So for you. I've seen the at least
David Schaich (he): the example of the square lattice in the lectures.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): what might be more interesting now is the question of
David Schaich (he): how this ground stage depends on the lattice structure.
David Schaich (he): What happens if we consider a honeycomb or
David Schaich (he): the trying to let us. instead of the square lattice, and you are familiar with
David Schaich (he): Give you another 2. Think about
David Schaich (he): of the dependence will be because it is
David Schaich (he): in this case you get to.
David Schaich (he): It's obvious. So when all of these spins are aligned. basically every single link in this. the energy.
David Schaich (he): the same in the sense that the spins on either side of it will all be pointed in the same direction. Look at us
David Schaich (he): all this.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. That structure actually has
David Schaich (he): no effect on it. What the ground state is
David Schaich (he): in all pre use cases, and. for that matter, any other lattice and any number of dimensions the Ground state will pay positive.
David Schaich (he): It's been a couple of J. All of those lattices will have a
David Schaich (he): and all the spins aligned.
David Schaich (he): So with that warm up
David Schaich (he): opposite case, Really. take that interactions with J. Consider what happens if it is negative. So the overall negative sign
David Schaich (he): we cancel out with the maybe a sign in this shade give a positive contribution to the spin
David Schaich (he): are the same. plus one square root of minus one squared. Let's go to one. So
David Schaich (he): what sort of
David Schaich (he): ground states
David Schaich (he): what we expect in this domain.
David Schaich (he): Good morning. started writing, and that. Sorry about the
David Schaich (he): Protector having called resolving some of those
David Schaich (he): letters. Yeah, that was already started going through the conceptual calculations here. Just see observation
David Schaich (he): As time is this
David Schaich (he): positive number.
David Schaich (he): and it increases the everything takes us away. probably a bit of an energy
David Schaich (he): microstates, and course all too.
David Schaich (he): the ground state. So in in the States we should expect to see you lots of things where
David Schaich (he): and spins on the end of each link are
David Schaich (he): along the opposite directions.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): yeah, minus one negative contribution to the from those
David Schaich (he): at the ends of each link
David Schaich (he): in particular for the ground state where we want the minimum possible energy. You want to maximize the number of spins.
David Schaich (he): Yes. oppose each other in the
David Schaich (he): yeah, the
David Schaich (he): at least
David Schaich (he): for the case of the squarely. This is probably the easiest to think about.
David Schaich (he): If we have.
David Schaich (he): it has, it's
David Schaich (he): the nearest neighbors
David Schaich (he): you want all of those to be opposing. That's been so that there are a
David Schaich (he): There's a negative contribution to the there.
David Schaich (he): It's neighbors to the
David Schaich (he): and so on, so we can get sort of fully alternated.
David Schaich (he): Microstate
David Schaich (he): will be the ground stage. and and as before, if we imagine flipping every single one of these links, they will. It is a different configuration. A different microstate still have the same energy.
David Schaich (he): So this alternating pattern.
David Schaich (he): So this
David Schaich (he): again, is you don't need to generate
David Schaich (he): on it
David Schaich (he): energy level with energy on this square last.
David Schaich (he): So there is a really good picture of
David Schaich (he): what's your number?
David Schaich (he): All opposing links that we
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): you can actually do the
David Schaich (he): same thing on the
David Schaich (he): This is an illustration of that where the colors are
David Schaich (he): visible, half of the
David Schaich (he): signs are clear, purple and half your color green. You can consider the purple and green sites to have spins pointing up the down resp.,
David Schaich (he): so that there is
David Schaich (he): a negative contribution from
David Schaich (he): each of these links between perfectly green that lowers the energy. and it's checking that every single link in
David Schaich (he): this configuration
David Schaich (he): is going to connect
David Schaich (he): such pairs of oppositely covered of sites or obviously pointing space.
David Schaich (he): you get that for
David Schaich (he): partition of the system into is fully alternating ground, states
David Schaich (he): again, the 2 possibilities where it
David Schaich (he): versus currently being spin down and green, spin up
David Schaich (he): so the before Hold on. I was trying to let us. There is the question. How do we distinguish, or can we distinguish this
David Schaich (he): problem. hey?
David Schaich (he): Microstate, in the disordered phase of high temperature we used to be here
David Schaich (he): can save this fully alternated. So is
for her
David Schaich (he): which. but it also seems from the I will on Wikipedia, where we grab that illustration of
David Schaich (he): what is the magnetization for these sorts of grounds on me. square or honeycomb lattice?
David Schaich (he): No, we can recall our definition of the
David Schaich (he): total number of students. and because we alternate between. convinced ourselves that there is an equal number of it.
David Schaich (he): I'll put in the and give us the 0 just like you would have
David Schaich (he): in that disorder phase.
David Schaich (he): Despite this.
David Schaich (he): just by visual inspection, we can
David Schaich (he): say
David Schaich (he): that this is not a disorder phase. There is a clear pattern or a clear order
David Schaich (he): in how the spins are
David Schaich (he): distributed
David Schaich (he): along the to this lattice
David Schaich (he): there is
David Schaich (he): scratching it out across this whole structure.
David Schaich (he): So somehow we have to reconciled
David Schaich (he): the vanishing.
My, if you associate with
David Schaich (he): in this order, configuration with the clear
David Schaich (he): order in the ground, state that we can see.
David Schaich (he): And a way to do this with you by
David Schaich (he): it's 2,
David Schaich (he): the 5 8 you
David Schaich (he): order parameter that distinguishes between that disorder phase
David Schaich (he): and this.
David Schaich (he): and it.
David Schaich (he): The idea is, we want to take advantage of the regular pattern
David Schaich (he): of alternating
to do that by.
David Schaich (he): as we label each spin with some
David Schaich (he): integer index in going from one up to the total number capital and of the spins.
David Schaich (he): Okay, mine is fine.
David Schaich (he): So we well chosen labeling. They all the
David Schaich (he): they have a quick spins are placed on
David Schaich (he): lot of sites with an odd value for this index in
still over in
David Schaich (he): you. Look at it.
David Schaich (he): There you go.
David Schaich (he): one of the
David Schaich (he): that to be
David Schaich (he): what is what we call the standard.
David Schaich (he): So it is almost identical to the magnetization just brings in this pattern of plus and minus one sign that we have chosen correspond to
David Schaich (he): in particular
David Schaich (he): lattice sites in such a way that's for this ground stays.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): it's maximum.
David Schaich (he): It's constructive emissions across all end of the sites that cancel out the whatever and energy. whereas in a
David Schaich (he): random microstates of the disorder, things
David Schaich (he): expect i'll put it down with more experience to be randomly aligned.
David Schaich (he): I won't be even on site, so that this someone would continue to cancel out.
David Schaich (he): We would be able to
David Schaich (he): to distinguish the order ground space.
David Schaich (he): Probably this word phase, even
David Schaich (he): in this anti-feromatic setting, with a negative
David Schaich (he): interaction
David Schaich (he): in this way
David Schaich (he): and one last
David Schaich (he): coming I can make about this because I am going to take it longer than I expected.
David Schaich (he): I'll just these conceptual questions about interacting with the systems on various licenses.
David Schaich (he): I've called this over the parameter. But as we introduce the concept of order parameter in the lectures.
David Schaich (he): this is meant to be
David Schaich (he): related to a derivative of the free energy.
David Schaich (he): It really
what I mean.
David Schaich (he): partition function, that the financial system.
David Schaich (he): So. in order to use that terminology.
David Schaich (he): make sure that the segregation
David Schaich (he): can it be you connected to the.
David Schaich (he): There is a right to to do this with a
David Schaich (he): for the
David Schaich (he): system that we.
David Schaich (he): How are we using this our basis? The partition function is the silver century
to the exponential of
David Schaich (he): minus energy over temperature.
David Schaich (he): our energy currently
David Schaich (he): yesterday nearest neighbor interactions.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. Well. we can do as a generalization is.
David Schaich (he): and to that interaction through
David Schaich (he): a couple in between each of the spins, and
David Schaich (he): it's so called, staggered.
David Schaich (he): Yes. brings in the
David Schaich (he): that we want in order to get the
David Schaich (he): standardization.
David Schaich (he): How is the derivative of the
David Schaich (he): with respect to this stagger magnetic field? It's not
David Schaich (he): i'm dropping.
David Schaich (he): And then, in order to get back to the easy model
David Schaich (he): that we used to.
David Schaich (he): We have taken the derivative to define this degradation.
David Schaich (he): that external magnetic field set to 0
David Schaich (he): and get back to
David Schaich (he): the system that we started off with.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): that is. if they fung way to general wives quickly. The
David Schaich (he): stuff we've been building up in the lectures. It's we're looking at that, it using model simple, cubic lattices
David Schaich (he): just for the same color simplicity, working with the simplest possible
David Schaich (he): interacting with system you can imagine.
David Schaich (he): Not just in the past
David Schaich (he): 20 min. We have quickly generalized this to
David Schaich (he): systems a couple of different line of structures.
David Schaich (he): And seeing how we can define order parameters for
David Schaich (he): this interface.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. One line of structure we haven't talked about
David Schaich (he): with a negative interactions from J. Is that
David Schaich (he): last triangular lattice in 2 dimensions.
David Schaich (he): So you want all to share that with the ground States would look like in that case
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): certainly
David Schaich (he): new Page just repeating the same sort of argument that it was
David Schaich (he): to maximize the number of opposing spins.
David Schaich (he): Get at the ground state
David Schaich (he): on this
David Schaich (he): I the lattice.
David Schaich (he): So if we work it, just the basic
David Schaich (he): you that sell
David Schaich (he): we space in a triangle.
David Schaich (he): replicates duplicate, copy, and paste
David Schaich (he): to go out to it full space to try and order that a structure. We have one of those sites
David Schaich (he): us neighbors.
David Schaich (he): and then we have
David Schaich (he): a problem because we have imposed 2 down the port expense all these 2,
David Schaich (he): which that gives a positive addition to the energy
David Schaich (he): rather than
David Schaich (he): negative energy contributions
David Schaich (he): get to that.
David Schaich (he): Okay. So another
David Schaich (he): more. Generally, this is the illustration of this basic dilemma there you
David Schaich (he): article published about twenty- almost 20 years ago. If we fix a couple of of this basic.
David Schaich (he): then whatever option we choose for the third one. well face hey, you
David Schaich (he): and if you increasing it a long interaction with one of his nearest neighbors. you can choose the upper. then these 2 lists.
David Schaich (he): Similarly, if we
David Schaich (he): she's a
David Schaich (he): that would be happy
David Schaich (he): to.
David Schaich (he): Okay, that's the energy
David Schaich (he): on that. So
David Schaich (he): what is going on in this case is that.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): given the lattice structure of this.
David Schaich (he): you can't
David Schaich (he): order all the spins into that fully alternating
David Schaich (he): a lot of structure is simply okay.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): what this is refer to as
David Schaich (he): injector there.
David Schaich (he): Yes. frustration all right. a frustrated
David Schaich (he): that wants to develop, that
David Schaich (he): we can only make some approximation to it.
And
David Schaich (he): well, formally this will arise.
David Schaich (he): or maybe my structure of that
David Schaich (he): it's not having a I apologize.
David Schaich (he): and the that means is that
David Schaich (he): it is possible to set up the line of structures, so that
David Schaich (he): the 2 sets of upward. And
David Schaich (he): so every nearest neighbor. Okay, I believe you
David Schaich (he): and vice versa, or
David Schaich (he): every Us. Neighbor on every green site, is the appropriate site
David Schaich (he): nearest neighbor Sites will be the same color.
David Schaich (he): Let's see by partition it was to 6 of colors or spin orientations. and if we try to do that.
David Schaich (he): or you find the lattice.
David Schaich (he): Approximately, you're there.
David Schaich (he): So this is an illustration of
David Schaich (he): yeah, yeah. low energy state as a close and approximation as the smart one year was able to come up with many years ago.
David Schaich (he): We can see that
David Schaich (he): most of the Us. Neighbor hairs are
David Schaich (he): happy. alternating, plus and minus spins.
David Schaich (he): but in every unit cell
David Schaich (he): we have one hair out of
David Schaich (he): to the energy.
David Schaich (he): Sorry
David Schaich (he): I read this up quickly.
David Schaich (he): It's for this single unit cell. There are 6 in generates spin configurations over microstates.
David Schaich (he): Good job have that energy given by minus J. Times 2
David Schaich (he): opposing links, plus that third link being aligned
David Schaich (he): so
for
David Schaich (he): contribution. The energy that is just J.
David Schaich (he): That to be less than 0
David Schaich (he): when we generalize to
David Schaich (he): large number of spins into a large number of like so
David Schaich (he): 2 heavy links in the i'm happy one in each of these.
David Schaich (he): It's. Then there
David Schaich (he): we end up with your collaboration of
David Schaich (he): Convince yourself that if you were to shift any one of
David Schaich (he): these rules
David Schaich (he): I would still maintain this pattern. Oh.
David Schaich (he): on frustrated link in each trial
David Schaich (he): there is a
David Schaich (he): exponentially large number of configurations
David Schaich (he): with that way
David Schaich (he): which do not have any obvious way of distinguishing them
David Schaich (he): a random distribution of
David Schaich (he): on that by the structure. So in a unless there's no order for frustrated
zoom.
David Schaich (he): there's no order for ever.
David Schaich (he): And with exponentially large number of
David Schaich (he): in the year log of that number
David Schaich (he): the I good computation of the entropy. It will be here. you know a positive number. even one of you.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): one of a small number of microstates.
David Schaich (he): and actually finding that
David Schaich (he): that low energy configuration for a frustrated his zoom very hard.
David Schaich (he): computational challenge.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, the language of theoretical computer science. It's really to say.
David Schaich (he): No.
David Schaich (he): all right. Calculation and P. Hard.
David Schaich (he): We have a low energy. Given the configuration of searching through all the configurations of no obvious patterns, you will guide us
David Schaich (he): computing resources at these classical computing.
In fact, it was precisely
David Schaich (he): yeah particle from which I grab this figure in 2,004
David Schaich (he): that use the Np. Hardness of
to you.
David Schaich (he): Really. Well, recent work. you know in quantum computers to this one the question
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): sorry to
David Schaich (he): go on to.
David Schaich (he): and your these sorts of fun phenomena that are coming out of. I usually tell them simple
David Schaich (he): interacting systems on fairly simple lattice structures.
David Schaich (he): dramatically. Behavior.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): Technological application. The structure of the
David Schaich (he): for the interaction that we have to to worry about.
David Schaich (he): Are there any questions before you spend the final time? Just looking at
David Schaich (he): the plans for the exam in 2 weeks from tomorrow?
David Schaich (he): It's not seeing any, I think. Keep this quick. I'll stop
David Schaich (he): writing things on the projected notes, and just go through.
David Schaich (he): Say, somebody
David Schaich (he): things we can look at on the canvas site. Just talk through those
remaining few minutes.
David Schaich (he): There are 3 exams up here with model solutions. I will actually look at any of those today. We'll look at any of the questions I've heard from some of you that you want to
David Schaich (he): practice with these exams under realistic conditions.
David Schaich (he): coming a couple of weeks if you haven't done so already. But just from the first and last pages there are a couple of interesting things we can save about how the exam this year we'll compare.
David Schaich (he): So. as I mentioned in
David Schaich (he): our recent announcement, we have a 2 h in-person exam this year, scheduled for
David Schaich (he): Friday afternoon, the 20 sixth of May in the electrical engineering building just across the University Square.
David Schaich (he): So it's a similar format to what was done last year 2022, the difference being that the
David Schaich (he): amount of time available it has double, which
David Schaich (he): should give you some of that more chance to write down more things about more of the questions.
David Schaich (he): So, at least as a rough
David Schaich (he): guide compared to the 2,022 exam. You can expect sort of overall enough to work to do to roughly double
David Schaich (he): compared to last year's 1 h in person. Exam.
David Schaich (he): You will still have the
David Schaich (he): a fairly standard formula sheets. So
David Schaich (he): all the basic
David Schaich (he): formula that appear here are things that you do not need to
David Schaich (he): memorize the central limit. Theorem is given, the entropy is given all of the definitions of partition, function, free energy. and the derived quantities for canonical and grand canonical ensembles
David Schaich (he): are all there at the fingertips. The ready to do is to apply these formulas 2,
David Schaich (he): the source of it
David Schaich (he): systems and questions that we've been considering in tutorials, some works, and some of the in the lecture notes.
David Schaich (he): The previous 2 year exams
David Schaich (he): in 2020 and 21 were more affected by the pandemic. Those both turned into
David Schaich (he): good. Take home exams over 8 long period, so they are to some extent to less direct kind to what to expect this year. You will see.
David Schaich (he): as you go through those questions on your own, that
David Schaich (he): they cover
David Schaich (he): in one way or another, essentially all of the topics that
David Schaich (he): have come up in this module bye zoom out to the full page. We have these and systems, each of our 10 units.
David Schaich (he): each of which can be by some interesting things
David Schaich (he): to look at.
David Schaich (he): So in the at first unit, where we introduce
David Schaich (he): capability, spaces, expectation values, variance.
David Schaich (he): you spend a fair amount of time looking at things like random walks.
David Schaich (he): Fusion arises from hey
David Schaich (he): many repetitions of an underlying
David Schaich (he): elementary process which then generalized to the statistical of samples.
David Schaich (he): Our underlying process is some particles that can adopt
David Schaich (he): some set of also the microstates with some corresponding probability. So we get statistical ensembles as a realization of that more abstract probability space.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): looking first at this micro canonical ensemble, we are conservation of energy and particle number are imposed. and the concept of thermodynamic equilibrium
David Schaich (he): is derived from that second law of thermodynamics.
David Schaich (he): The the entropy never decreases as time goes on, and it's physical on some of the samples, it's microstates.
David Schaich (he): So equilibrium is the condition we are that entropy is maximized.
David Schaich (he): We done further and generalize those concepts.
David Schaich (he): I'm, looking at the canonical ensemble by adding in a large thermal reservoir
David Schaich (he): which the system can exchange energy while keeping the temperature fixed.
David Schaich (he): And this is where we we're introduced to the partition function. The Boltzmann factor.
David Schaich (he): How observable quantities, like entropy and internal energy, can be derived from the partition function.
David Schaich (he): and how those are the role properties of systems depend on the information content. I'm looking at distinguishable versus indistinguishable.
David Schaich (he): And you guys, 4 and 5 are applications of that can
David Schaich (he): to ideal gases. When we looked at mixing the mixing entropy, reversibility, and equations of states, the ideal as well
David Schaich (he): bring in the pressure.
David Schaich (he): Yes, a
David Schaich (he): response to a change in the control parameter of the volume.
David Schaich (he): and then putting those ideal gases into
David Schaich (he): some containers and manipulating them, connects
David Schaich (he): that whole
David Schaich (he): foundation to these thermodynamic cycles. Specifically, we looked at key engines. The Carnot cycle and lectures, the auto cycle of the tutorial, the Diesel cycle
David Schaich (he): in a homework really either move around to do work
David Schaich (he): and can define the efficiency
David Schaich (he): of the work that we do
David Schaich (he): and analyze both individual processes and those overall cycles in the form of the pressure building diagrams.
David Schaich (he): Finally, getting back to a third
David Schaich (he): statistical, also the grand Canonical One. where you generalize the thermal reservoir to a particle reservoir, both particle and and energy
David Schaich (he): can change
David Schaich (he): the chemical. Potential. It's introduced as the additional quantity along with temperature that is kept fixed and alright.
David Schaich (he): quantum gases.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, so it it was like photons and fermions based on
David Schaich (he): quantum statistics that we introduced as an all results. and showed how the Bose-einstein statistics of bosons. and the fairly direct statistics of fermions
David Schaich (he): alright
David Schaich (he): determined by something over the differing occupation numbers, those types of particles
David Schaich (he): going on energy level, why energy, level and approach in the high temperature, classical limits. The earlier classical approach to statistical, that we
David Schaich (he): based on looking at a single particle, then generalizing it to many particles, and correcting for over-counting.
David Schaich (he): And finally, what we've been doing in the past few weeks is introducing interactions to these systems.
David Schaich (he): focusing on the using model in particular. Looking at
David Schaich (he): these transitions or the parameters.
David Schaich (he): the meat field approximation. Finally, on Monday. the
David Schaich (he): numerical, important sampling to analyze these much more complicated systems that interactions produce. So what I just went through in
David Schaich (he): the past 10 min is
David Schaich (he): sort of brief summary of that we have. And yeah. that's units. So just a couple of the pages summarizing all of the
David Schaich (he): a recap of the topics of each of those
David Schaich (he): you. That's so.
David Schaich (he): in case I went through that too quickly, because we're running out of time for today.
David Schaich (he): there's just a few paragraphs.
David Schaich (he): hitting all of those key points which you can take a look at and decide if you want to
David Schaich (he): follow any of the links back to
David Schaich (he): the corresponding discussion.
David Schaich (he): in case it didn't sound
David Schaich (he): too familiar, or you're not to that confidence in your
David Schaich (he): understanding of it for the exam. So that took us a minute over time for
David Schaich (he): lining up outside. But I will check to see if there any questions about
David Schaich (he): that sort of review. You an excel plans
David Schaich (he): it's 2021. That's one of those
David Schaich (he): take home exams
David Schaich (he): done remotely. Access to
David Schaich (he): the lecture knows
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): reading list. So yeah, see instructions on canvas. If I recall correctly for a few years ago. It was a time exam. even though it was done remotely
David Schaich (he): with access to the lecture notes, and I think it was
David Schaich (he): 2 h in total that included time to upload and stand solutions
David Schaich (he): as well as
David Schaich (he): actually do the
David Schaich (he): any questions
David Schaich (he): there will be slight differences. There are some things that you can recognize from that formula sheets. The partition function is not going to change from years to year.
David Schaich (he): But perhaps some of the yeah and it integrals that can be useful. Those might change depending on the question. So you can compare the formula sheets from these 3 past exams that look
David Schaich (he): mostly similar, but not identical, and the 2023 formal. If she
David Schaich (he): that's where we follow that
David Schaich (he): all to
this
David Schaich (he): yeah, so the
David Schaich (he): I would say both the they differ in terms of the scale of complexity of what you are
David Schaich (he): asked to do. So the gaps in the lecture notes are sort of straightforward. and the tutorial activities
David Schaich (he): can be larger scale, longer term things for you to work on. So an exam. Question
David Schaich (he): 2 to the limited amount of time available. The questions on the exams are going to be easier than
David Schaich (he): the whole works for the tutorial activities.
David Schaich (he): It will be you up it less fill in the blank straightforward and the gaps.
David Schaich (he): So if you look at both of those, i'll get a good bracket on what is expected.
David Schaich (he): and I think that takes us to
David Schaich (he): yeah, the end of our.
David Schaich (he): It's like about the room. So
David Schaich (he): i'll stop the recording shut down, and they see you Monday morning before
David Schaich (he): that, a final piece of luxuries I interacting systems.